docs: a new getting started tutorial for pebble (#421)
canonical/pebble: docs/tutorial/getting-started.md

> # Getting started

Author: I have added a paragraph at the very beginning.

> ## 1 Prerequisites

Author: I have removed the numbers, but only because of consistency with other Canonical documentation.

The navigation will only be on the right if you have a widescreen and maximize your browser. The doc site uses responsive web design, meaning if the browser is not wide enough, the table of contents simply won't show on the right. Based on my experiment, it will be gone if it's less than 1312 pixels, and for a 2560 wide screen, people usually split the screen by putting docs on the one side and then IDE/terminal on the other. In this case, if the IDE is 50% width of the screen, there is no table of contents.

I think the numbers help, especially for long articles, when you are in the middle of a section, you see another title but because it's long, you don't know if it's an H1 H2 or H3 heading, so you are kind of lost.

- A Linux machine.

## 2 Install Pebble

> ### 2.1 Download and install the latest release

Author: In order to follow the style guide "Headings require content and should not be followed directly by a subheading", there are two solutions here:

1. Add something below this H2 heading, before the H3 heading. However, I think no extra information is needed here because it's clear this section contains two ways of doing something, and that something is already mentioned in the H2 headings. This means duplicated information.
2. Remove the H3 headings (so that no headings are stacked), but it makes the readability worse.

In this particular case, I think it's fine that nothing follows the H2 heading before the H3 heading.

There are other examples where this guide isn't strictly followed and I think it makes sense, for example, [this one](https://juju.is/docs/juju/tutorial#maintain-4). It doesn't have to say that "in this section, we will learn how to scale, perform a custom action, upgrade and observe, which are all part of maintenance".

I'm keeping it as it is, thanks.

> # Getting started

Author: Option 2 means there is a table of contents on the landing page, but it contains duplicated information since article titles are already on the navigation bar on the left. [According to Anne, this conflicts with the "no-stacked-headings" rule](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/419#issuecomment-2144198273).

So I will go for option 1 and change the home page to singular for now.

### 2.3 Sanity check

After installation, if you run `pebble`, you should see some output equivalent to the following:

```bash
$ pebble
Pebble lets you control services and perform management actions on
the system that is running them.

Usage: pebble <command> [<options>...]

Commands can be classified as follows:

       Run: run, help, version
      Plan: add, plan
  Services: services, logs, start, restart, signal, stop, replan
    Checks: checks, health
     Files: push, pull, ls, mkdir, rm, exec
   Changes: changes, tasks
   Notices: warnings, okay, notices, notice, notify

Set the PEBBLE environment variable to override the configuration directory
(which defaults to /var/lib/pebble/default). Set PEBBLE_SOCKET to override
the unix socket used for the API (defaults to $PEBBLE/.pebble.socket).

For more information about a command, run 'pebble help <command>'.
For a short summary of all commands, run 'pebble help --all'.
```

Pebble is invoked using `pebble <command>`. To get more information:

- To see a help summary, type `pebble -h`.
- To see a short description of all commands, type `pebble help --all`.

> - To see details for one command, type `pebble help <command>` or `pebble <command> -h`.

Reviewer: We should probably pick one or the other. I'd say `pebble help <command>` as that's what the main help output suggests.

## 3 Configure Pebble

First, create a directory for Pebble configuration:

```bash
$ mkdir -p ~/PEBBLE/layers
$ export PEBBLE=$HOME/PEBBLE
$ echo "export PEBBLE=$HOME/PEBBLE" >> ~/.bashrc # add $PEBBLE to your bashrc
```

Then, create a simple layer:

```bash
$ echo """\
summary: Simple layer

description: |
    A simple layer.

services:
    http-server:
        override: replace
        summary: demo http server

>         command: python3 -m http.server 8080

Reviewer: Nice choice of a readily-available service!

        startup: enabled
""" > $PEBBLE/layers/001-http-server.yaml
```

This creates a simple layer containing only one service (which runs a basic HTTP server using Python's `http` module, listening on port 8080).

## 4 Run the Pebble daemon

```bash
$ pebble run
2024-06-02T11:30:02.925Z [pebble] Started daemon.
2024-06-02T11:30:02.936Z [pebble] POST /v1/services 10.751704ms 202
2024-06-02T11:30:02.936Z [pebble] Started default services with change 77.
2024-06-02T11:30:02.942Z [pebble] Service "http-server" starting: python3 -m http.server 8080
```

> This starts the Pebble daemon, and as you can see from the log, our HTTP server is already started, which can be verified by running `curl localhost:8080` in another terminal tab.

Reviewer: Should we add a paragraph (sentence) after this saying "To exit the Pebble daemon, press Ctrl-C (which sends an "interrupt" signal to the process)." or similar.

## 5 View, start, and stop services

You can view the status of services by running `pebble services`. Open another terminal tab, and run:

```bash
$ pebble services
Service      Startup  Current  Since
http-server  enabled  active   today at 11:30 UTC
```

> Use `pebble stop SERVICE_NAME1 SERVICE_NAME2 ...` to stop one or more services. Run:

Reviewer: We've normally used `<...>` for placeholders. How about `pebble stop <service1> <service2> ...`

```bash
$ pebble stop http-server
```

And the service `http-server` is stopped. We can verify it by viewing all the services:

```bash
$ pebble services
Service      Startup  Current   Since
http-server  enabled  inactive  today at 11:33 UTC
```

And, if we run `curl localhost:8080`, we get a "connection refused" error, which confirms the service is down.

To start it again, run:

```bash
$ pebble start http-server
```

> And it's started now:

Reviewer: I don't think we need this last `pebble services` command. They've probably got the idea by now.

        startup: enabled
""" > $PEBBLE/layers/002-another-server.yaml
```

This creates another layer containing only one service running an HTTP server listening on a different port 8081. Then let's add this layer to a plan:

```bash
$ pebble add layer1 $PEBBLE/layers/002-another-server.yaml
Layer "layer1" added successfully from "/home/ubuntu/PEBBLE_HOME/layers/002-another-server.yaml"
```

When we update the service configuration by adding a layer, the services changed won't be automatically restarted. If we check the services:

```bash
$ pebble services
Service        Startup  Current   Since
http-server    enabled  active    today at 11:41 UTC
http-server-2  enabled  inactive  -
```

We can see that although a new service has been added, it's not active yet.

To bring the service state in sync with the new configuration, run `pebble replan`:

```
$ pebble replan
2024-06-02T11:40:39Z INFO Service "http-server" already started.
```

Now if we check all the services:

```bash
$ pebble services
Service        Startup  Current  Since
http-server    enabled  active   today at 11:34 UTC
http-server-2  enabled  active   today at 11:40 UTC
```

> We can see that the new HTTP server defined in the newly added layer is brought up as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can see that the new HTTP server defined in the newly-added layer has been started up as well.
```

## 7 Where to go from here

> - To know more about running the Pebble daemon, see [How to run the daemon (server)](../how-to/run-the-daemon.md).

Reviewer: I would use "learn" rather than "know" here and below. Somehow it reads better.

- To know more about viewing, starting and stopping services, see [How to view, start, and stop services](../how-to/view-start-stop-services.md).
- To know more about updating and restarting services, see [How to update and restart services](../how-to/update-restart-services.md).
- To know more about configuring layers, see [How to configure layers](../how-to/configure-layers.md).

> - To know more about the specification of layers, read the [Layer specification](../reference/layer-specification.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- To learn more about layer configuration options, read the [Layer specification](../reference/layer-specification.md).
```

> - Read other [how-to articles](../how-to/index.md), [explanations](../explanation/index.md) and [references](../reference/index.md).

Reviewer: This seems too general too me (and they can just use the menu to get elsewhere). I'd remove this last bullet point.

> # Getting started

Reviewer 2: The heading should be more specific, "Getting started with Pebble".

In the current Pebble doc there is a single tutorial, but if / when the product becomes more complex you may want to create a second tutorial that focuses on a different learning journey. So headings should be descriptive.

For reference:
https://juju.is/docs/juju/tutorial
https://documentation.ubuntu.com/lxd/en/latest/tutorial/first_steps/
https://maas.io/docs/tutorial-bootstrapping-maas

Author: The doc site has and only has Pebble, unlike the Juju docs site where you find both Juju and Juju SDK.

I feel like the "with pebble" part is redundant. Pushing back gently.

> In this tutorial, we will download and install Pebble, configure layers, run the Pebble daemon, and work with layers and services. After this tutorial, you will have a basic understanding of what Pebble is, how to install it, and how to use it to orchestrate services. It takes about 15 minutes to complete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we will download and install Pebble, configure layers, run the Pebble daemon, and work with layers and services. This tutorial takes about 15 minutes to complete.
After this tutorial, you will have a basic understanding of what Pebble is and how to use it to orchestrate services, and you can continue exploring more advanced features and use cases (see [Next steps](<link-to-next-steps)).
```

Reviewer 2: I suggest restructuring it slightly.

The first part sets expectations about what will be done. Which is why I moved up the estimated time required.

> 

Reviewer 2: Please remove additional blank line.

> After that, you can continue exploring more advanced features and use cases (links at the end).

Reviewer 2: Can be removed; combined with the above intro paragraph.

## Prerequisites

- A Linux machine.

## Download and install Pebble

> Find the latest tag on the [latest release page](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/releases/latest), then run the following commands to download, extract, and install the latest release (replace `v1.11.0` with the latest tag and `amd64` with your architecture):

Reviewer 2: This isn't a major point.
But at this point in time, since there is already a v12 version, I think the tutorial should reference that instead.

> Find the latest tag on the [latest release page](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/releases/latest), then run the following commands to download, extract, and install the latest release (replace `v1.11.0` with the latest tag and `amd64` with your architecture):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Get the latest tag on the [latest release page](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/releases/latest), then run the following commands to download, extract, and install the latest Pebble release. Replace `v1.12.0` with the latest tag and `amd64` with your architecture, and make sure that {file}`/usr/local/bin/` is included in your system `PATH` variable.
```

Author: Find/Get - what's the difference? If we have to get down to the word: I'm not a native speaker, but for me, the process is more "find" than "get" - you open the page, you have to find where the tag is. It's not like it's a CURL command where you run it and you immediately get the tag alone in the result.

1.11 -> 1.12: updated.

release -> pebble release: redundant wording. This is the release page for pebble, this is the tutorial for pebble, and most importantly, this is the doc site for pebble. Why bombarding the users with pebble whenever possible?

/user/local/bin in path: added.

```bash
wget https://github.com/canonical/pebble/releases/download/v1.11.0/pebble_v1.11.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz
tar zxvf pebble_v1.11.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz
sudo mv pebble /usr/local/bin/ # make sure it's in your $PATH
```

## Verify Pebble installation

Once the installation is complete, verify that `pebble` has been installed correctly by running:

```bash
pebble
```

This should produce output similar to the following:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: I strongly suggest using the terminal output directive for this. While this may just be 'formatting', it helps readers easily discern between commands that they expect to copy and paste, vs output that is meant to illustrate what happens.

Author: I suppose by "terminal output" you mean ```console```? I changed them all to preserve the colours.

If you mean using the myst terminal output, I'm pushing it back, for two reasons:

- Most of all, IIRC, as we discussed earlier with the team, we prefer to use markdown instead of myst.
- Markdown will render in most IDE/text editors out of the box, providing an easy live preview, but many myst directives can't, making editing and previewing at the same time difficult: the process has to be edit->build->preview->rinse and repeat.

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```{terminal}
   :input: pebble
   :user: user
   :host: host
   :dir: ~
Pebble lets you control services and perform management actions on
the system that is running them.
Usage: pebble <command> [<options>...]
...
```
```

Author: See above comments.

Pebble lets you control services and perform management actions on
the system that is running them.

Usage: pebble <command> [<options>...]

...
```

## Configure Pebble

Now that Pebble has been installed, we can set up a basic configuration.

> First, let's create a directory for Pebble configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, let's create a directory for Pebble configuration and add the `PEBBLE` environment variable to {file}`~/.bashrc`. 
```

Reviewer 2: Please avoid comments in the code.
https://docs.ubuntu.com/styleguide/en/#code-examples-in-documentation

```bash
mkdir -p ~/PEBBLE/layers
export PEBBLE=$HOME/PEBBLE

> echo "export PEBBLE=$HOME/PEBBLE" >> ~/.bashrc # add $PEBBLE to your bashrc

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
echo "export PEBBLE=$HOME/PEBBLE" >> ~/.bashrc
```

```

Next, create a layer by running:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```{code-block}
:emphasize-lines: 8, 12

echo """\
summary: Simple layer

description: |
    A simple layer.

services:
    http-server:
        override: replace
        summary: demo http server
        command: python3 -m http.server 8080
        startup: enabled
""" > $PEBBLE/layers/001-http-server.yaml
```
```

The code-block directive is useful in cases like this when you are referencing specific lines in subsequent sections.

Author: See above comments.

Author: See above comments.

echo """\
summary: Simple layer

description: |
    A simple layer.

services:
    http-server:
        override: replace
        summary: demo http server
        command: python3 -m http.server 8080
        startup: enabled
""" > $PEBBLE/layers/001-http-server.yaml
```

> This creates a simple layer containing only one service (which runs a basic HTTP server using Python's `http` module, listening on port 8080).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This creates a simple layer containing only one service (`http-server`) which runs a basic HTTP server using Python's `http` module, listening on port 8080.
```

I suggest calling attention to the name of the service based on the layer configuration since at this point in time the reader doesn't have a full understanding of the structure of the YAML file.

## Start the Pebble daemon

> Now we are ready to run the Pebble daemon.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we are ready to run the Pebble daemon. To start the daemon, run:
```

Author: See above comment.

> Pebble is invoked using `pebble <command>`. (To get more information, run `pebble -h`.)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```{note}
Pebble is invoked using `pebble <command>`. To get more information, run `pebble -h`.
```
```

I still think this is conflating explanation when it is not needed at this point of the tutorial. But if you want to keep this here I suggest putting it inside an alert box since it is an additional piece of information that the reader can choose to read or skip.

And this note box should be moved ahead before the "Now we are ready to run ..." sentence.

Author: It is necessary, because most command goes like `command <args>`, while pebble, like kubectl, goes like `command subcommand <args>`. It's worth mentioning that pebble has sub commands before running it for the first time.

> To start the daemon, run:

Reviewer 2: To remove since it is combined in the first paragraph.

```bash
pebble run
```

> This starts the Pebble daemon itself, as well as all the services that are marked as `startup: enabled` (in our simple layer created above, the `http-server` service is marked as `startup: enabled`). You should get some output similar to the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This starts the Pebble daemon itself, as well as services that are marked as `startup: enabled`. In our simple layer created above, you can see that the `http-server` service is marked as `startup: enabled`. You should get some output similar to the following:
```

I would also suggest using the Sphinx code-block directive for instances such as this to highlight important lines of code that you reference in neighbouring sections.

Author: I think leaving them in the parenthesis is more suitable because it's not a parallel sentence to the previous one but more of a minor explanation.

Reviewer 2: Ok, I understand your point.
But I still suggest rephrasing the sentence slightly. It is a standalone sentence that should be outside the parentheses, or shortened slightly for better readability.

```suggestion
This starts the Pebble daemon itself, as well as all the services that are marked as `startup: enabled` (such as the `http-server` service in the simple layer created anove).
```

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: Same comment about using the terminal output directive.
https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/421/files#r1635663342

For Discourse there is no such option but we should take advantage of Sphinx capabilities.

2024-06-02T11:30:02.925Z [pebble] Started daemon.
2024-06-02T11:30:02.936Z [pebble] POST /v1/services 10.751704ms 202
2024-06-02T11:30:02.936Z [pebble] Started default services with change 77.
2024-06-02T11:30:02.942Z [pebble] Service "http-server" starting: python3 -m http.server 8080
...
```

> As you can see from the log, our HTTP server is started too, which can be verified by running `curl localhost:8080` in another terminal tab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see from the log, our HTTP server has started too. This can be verified by running `curl localhost:8080` in another terminal tab.
```

Author: Not changing this, it makes no difference.

> > Note: To exit the Pebble daemon, press Ctrl-C (which sends an "interrupt" signal to the process).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```{note}
To exit the Pebble daemon, press {kbd}`Ctrl-C` (which sends an “interrupt” signal to the process).
```
```

Do use the Sphinx directives for consistent Canonical branding / styling.
https://github.com/canonical/sphinx-docs-starter-pack/blob/main/doc-cheat-sheet-myst.md?plain=1#L148

Author: It's not Sphinx, it's markdown.

Reviewer 2: Yes, this is Markdown but we are using the MyST flavor in Sphinx, which supports Sphinx directives:
https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/v0.17.1/syntax/reference.html#extended-block-tokens

We should use the "note" syntax instead of a quote for alert boxes.
https://myst-parser.readthedocs.io/en/v0.17.1/syntax/reference.html#extended-block-tokens

## View, start and stop services

> While the Pebble daemon is running, you can view the status of services by running `pebble services`. Open another terminal tab, and run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the Pebble daemon is running, you can view the status of services by opening another terminal tab and running:
```

Author: Not changing this, it makes no difference.

```bash
pebble services
```

You should see output similar to the following:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: Same comment about using the terminal output directive.
https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/421/files#r1635663342

Service      Startup  Current  Since
http-server  enabled  active   today at 11:30 UTC
```

> Use `pebble stop <service1> <service2> ...` to stop one or more services. You can stop the running `http-server` service by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can stop the running `http-server` service by running:
```

Author: The original line was suggested by Ben in his previous review and I find it better to explain the format.

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: Same comment about using the terminal output directive.
https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/421/files#r1635663342

pebble stop http-server
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```{tip}
To stop one or more running services, run `pebble stop <service1> <service2>`.

```

This reference can be moved to the end since it is not needed as part of the current learning journey.

Author: Can't be rendered by markdown.

You should get output similar to the following:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: Same comment about using the terminal output directive.
https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/421/files#r1635663342

Service      Startup  Current   Since
http-server  enabled  inactive  today at 11:33 UTC
```

> Now the service `http-server` is stopped. If we run `curl localhost:8080` again, we get a "connection refused" error, which confirms the service is down.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now the service `http-server` has stopped. If we run `curl localhost:8080` again, we should get a "connection refused" error, which confirms the service is down.
```

To start it again, run:

```bash
pebble start http-server
```

## Add a new layer

Now let's add another layer containing a different service that is also an HTTP server. To create a new layer, run:

```bash
echo """\
summary: Simple layer 2

description: |
    Yet another simple layer.

services:
    http-server-2:
        override: replace
        summary: demo http server 2
        command: python3 -m http.server 8081
        startup: enabled
""" > $PEBBLE/layers/002-another-http-server.yaml
```

> This creates another layer that also contains a single service (running a basic

Reviewer 2: Similar suggestion as to the sentence structure:
https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/421/files#r1635671803

Author: At this point the user already is familiar with the concept, no need to repeat again. The previous comment was fixed.

HTTP server using the Python `http.server` module listening on a different port 8081).

Add the new layer to a Pebble plan by running:

```bash
pebble add layer1 $PEBBLE/layers/002-another-http-server.yaml
```

If the layer is added successfully, the above command should produce the following output:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: Same comment about using the terminal output directive.
https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/421/files#r1635663342

Layer "layer1" added successfully from "/home/ubuntu/PEBBLE_HOME/layers/002-another-http-server.yaml"
```

> Even though the service configuration has been updated with the newly added layer, the newly added services won't be automatically started. If we check the services:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even though the service configuration has been updated with the newly added layer, the newly added service(s) won't be automatically started. If we check the status of services:
```

```bash
pebble services
```

> We can see that although the new service `http-server-2` has been added, it's still "inactive":

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can see that although the new service `http-server-2` has been added, it's still "inactive".
```

Author: There is an output below this line, colon makes more sense than period.

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: Same comment about using the terminal output directive.
https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/421/files#r1635663342

Service        Startup  Current   Since
http-server    enabled  active    today at 11:41 UTC
http-server-2  enabled  inactive  -
```

To bring the service state in sync with the new configuration, run `pebble replan`:

```bash
pebble replan
```

> And you get output similar to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should get output similar to:
```

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: Same comment about using the terminal output directive.
https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/421/files#r1635663342

2024-06-02T11:40:39Z INFO Service "http-server" already started.
```

Now if we check all the services again:

```bash
pebble services
```

We can see that the new HTTP server `http-server-2` defined in the newly added layer should have been started and be shown as "active":

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: Same comment about using the terminal output directive.
https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/421/files#r1635663342

# Getting started with Pebble

In this tutorial, we will download and install Pebble, configure layers, run the Pebble daemon, and work with layers and services. This tutorial takes about 15 minutes to complete.

After this tutorial, you will have a basic understanding of what Pebble is and how to use it to orchestrate services, and you can continue exploring more advanced features and use cases (see {ref}`next_steps`).

## Prerequisites

- A Linux machine.

## Download and install Pebble

Get the latest tag on the [latest release page](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/releases/latest), then run the following commands to download, extract, and install the latest release (replace `v1.12.0` with the latest tag and `amd64` with your architecture):

```bash
wget https://github.com/canonical/pebble/releases/download/v1.12.0/pebble_v1.12.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz
tar zxvf pebble_v1.12.0_linux_amd64.tar.gz
sudo mv pebble /usr/local/bin/
```

> Also, make sure `/usr/local/bin/` is in your `$PATH`.

Reviewer: Does this need to be said? Wouldn't `/usr/local/bin` always be on `PATH` on Linux?

If we do keep it, let's drop the trailing slash after `bin/`, as that's not typical for `PATH`.

Author: Since the default PATH can be modified by users, I'll keep this (suggested by Anne) and remove the trailing slash.
